It's really good to be here.
I don't need an introduction about myself.
I love being in this church.
I think it must be about eight years now, and I'm really happy here.
I want to ask you a question.
Have you made any New Year's resolutions?
Yeah, so you're still keeping them.
It's still early enough in the year to choose some new ones.
I can give you some suggestions.
Okay, that you resolve to exercise once or twice a year.
Is that good?
Or that you...
This is for all of you.
Resolve to read all the terms and conditions for random products.
You may need a magnifying glass for that, but that's what I'm old fashioned on your computer.
You can do other things.
What about resolve to sell your vacuum cleaner?
It just collects dust.
And one for David, oh, he's there, yes.
One for David, resolve to reward yourself with a new golf shirt, because last month you got a hole in one.
We're starting a new series of talks today entitled Unshakable and it's based on Daniel's unshakable life in Babylon's pagan culture and today we see how Daniel's unshakable life began with a quiet decision.
He resolved
And the word resolved is the same root as resolution, which is why I mentioned the resolutions at the beginning.
And he's resolved to honor and obey God in an alien and idol-worshiping culture.
The message of Daniel is very clear.
The whole book is about God being in charge of history.
And in chapter 4, verse 17, the
The most high is sovereign over the kingdoms of men and gives them anyone he wishes, gives them to anyone he wishes.
That's encouraging when you hear about nations in chaos and turmoil in our world today, so much bad news.
But learn that this most high God is sovereign over the kingdoms of men.
God is in charge.
And the affairs of men may have got out of hand
but not the affairs of God.
And we used to sing, God is still on the throne and he will remember his own.
We shall see that that is why Daniel was so courageous and used so much by God.
When we are conscious of God being in charge of history, that gives us courage to face anything that might happen to us.
So I'm going to read the first seven, well, I'm not going to read the first seven verses.
They'll be on the screen.
Oh, yes, this will go back to that.
I forgot about that.
Yes, that's.
That's Fishnet Lighthouse.
It's about eight miles off the Irish coast, which is why I put it on, because it's been through a lot of storms.
It must have been 100 years old now, but it was very cleverly built by clever Irishmen who designed bricks that would stick to, that would
lock into each other so it has never been knocked down by the storms.
Unshakable, and today we're going to look about kind of unshakable resolves.
But I'm not going to read the whole of Daniel chapter 1.
I'll give you a summary.
We'll put the words up and you can follow them.
It's just the last bit I want to talk about.
It begins with
King Jehoyakun, who had been a bad ruler of Judah and was permitting and encouraging idolatry and immorality.
And despite the warnings from God, it was a frightening chocolate.
God would give Nebuchadnezzar the ruler of Babylon victory over Judah, taking many captives, including Daniel and his friends into Babylon.
And can you imagine Daniel traveling now?
It was just over a thousand miles from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Probably chained because that was it.
And it was a long journey.
It probably took maybe 11 months to do that journey because they were on foot.
And could you imagine his thoughts?
A young man who was probably of royal family and who's lived in luxury.
And suddenly he's being dragged through the desert
and wondering what's happened to God.
Where is he?
And yeah, it was tough for him.
Nebuchadnezzar was an evil man, impulsive, a murderer, vicious beyond belief, a tyrant who loved to roost people alive.
Sunday lunch.
He was a collector of gods.
He built lots of temples.
when Daniel and his friends suddenly find themselves being in a different situation, they suddenly find them that the king that never could neither is interested in them and wants them to be part of his rule and reign, and he wants to train them.
So firstly, in verses three and four, he wants to educate them, Babylonian education.
He wanted to train these boys to work for his government.
But to live in this new culture, Daniel needed a movie, even wanted to know the language and the culture.
He was, Daniel was strong in God.
And he said, that's okay, we can cope with that.
And then the Babylonian names, names are important.
When we are addressed by name, we feel included, noticed and valued.
I'm John Charles Paul, and
My name was used in lots of different ways.
When I went down the street of my village and to Andy Michael was the owner of a hardware shop and he was always sitting outside and I came past one day and he said, here comes the apostle Paul.
I wondered about that.
When I was at school I was called JC.
You know what that means.
And I often wondered, why?
Daniel and Ku had Jewish names that reminded them of their God, but Nebuchadnezzar wanted to give them Babylonian names.
And you'll see on the screen if we go forward a little bit.
Oh, a little bit further.
except that's right, there we are.
Now you see Daniel's name there, the EL at the end stands for Elohim and the Hanania, the name below, the YAH at the end is Yahweh, so each of their names reminded them of God and Nebuchadnezzar wanted them to have different names that
were based on false gods.
And you could look at that bell, bell Shazar, bell is the God, and there's a mention of the God in each of those names.
But for Daniel and his friends, their names reminded them of their God.
And I'm glad that I've got John and Paul as my name, because they were two great people in New Testament, weren't they?
I think I was born around it.
They could change their names, but he couldn't change their identity because it was in their heart.
These young men
just teenagers, maybe 15, 16, 17 years old.
And Daniel consistently, well, actually it's funny, Daniel, when he wrote the word that's now Daniel, the book of Daniel, when he wrote it, he was very naughty because he misspelled the Babylonian names every time in different ways, just to get his own back on them, I think.
And then Babylonian food.
That was a big temptation, the hot cuisine.
I was going to say the best things in sliced bread, but they didn't have sliced bread then, so it's the best cuisine before sliced bread.
And one of the things they really loved in Nebuchadnezzaries was to eat pig, which is unclean for the Jews.
probably were pagan rituals at meal times, raised your glasses for a toast.
You shouldn't do that because they didn't have any toast, did they?
Never mind.
What would Daniel do in that situation?
That's the big question.
What would he do?
And it says, Daniel resolved.
Daniel resolved.
All right.
Yeah, let me reverse it now, but Daniel resolved not to defile himself with the royal food and wine, and he asked the chief official for permission not to defile himself in this way.
Now, God had caused the official to show favor and sympathy to Daniel.
Do you see how God's work?
He's always one step ahead of you in your life, you know?
And you're surprised when you try to do something that's difficult and you go through it and you think, oh, God's there.
That's great.
He's a wonderful God.
He's always ahead of us.
He knows the past and he knows your future too.
And notice that verse begins with the word butts.
I love the word butts and I love the butts in the New Testament and in the Bible, in fact.
I always think if I had the time in my life,
More time left in my life, I'd preach a sermon on every but in the Bible.
But instead, I'm just highlighting them.
But my favorite one is Acts 13, verses 13, 31.
When they had carried out all that was written about Jesus, they took him down from the cross and laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him from the dead.
What a great verse.
What a great bet.
And Daniel resolved not to eat the royal food.
Daniel knew the Levitical teaching, the teaching from the Book of Leviticus that was every Jew would know the rules and regulations there forbidding the eating of unclean food.
He knew God's word.
And that's so important for us.
I read about David Livingstone in poor health in his last days, and his servant found him kneeling at his bedside with his Bible in front of him, because he was very poorly in bad health.
And the servant asked, what are you doing?
He said, I'm looking to see if there are any commands I've not obeyed before I die.
David knew that a vertical teaching, and he wanted to obey God.
Are you keen to obey God?
We've got to read this book to know what obedience is about.
Daniel acted graciously and he spoke his case.
He didn't go on a hunger strike.
He didn't have a belligerent attitude towards the Babylonians.
He treated the people over him.
He treated them with respect and persuaded them
And with God's help, too, he persuaded them and he was allowed to eat vegetables and water, which doesn't appeal to me at all.
I like my vegetables, but beds and water only.
I had a friend, a pastor from Scotland, who fasted it for 40 days on vegetable water.
He didn't do any good, I don't think.
But Daniel acted graciously
Even though it was a difficult decision and he had to ask, can I have vegetables and water rather than the luxurious food that is on Nebuchadnezzar's table?
And that took a lot for Daniel to ask that.
It was dangerous to ask, can I have vegetables and water?
It would be an offense to Nebuchadnezzar and he could have ended up, I don't know, in the lion's den or being whatever.
And then Daniel also had access to Jeremiah's prophecies, written many years before.
In Daniel 9 verse 2, Darius was now the ruler, and Daniel wrote, I, Daniel, understood from the scriptures according to the word of the Lord, given to Jeremiah the prophet, that the desolation of Jerusalem would last 70 years.
So you see,
Daniel was searching scriptures to find out what's going on.
And he realized that this prophecy, remember this prophecy, or maybe he had the words with him.
But Jeremiah read about how God's people would live in exile.
And Jeremiah 29 verse 5, Jeremiah wrote, build houses and settle down, plant gardens and eat what they produce.
Mary and have sons and daughters also seek the peace and prosperity of the city to which I have called you into exile.
Praise the Lord for it because if it prospers, you too will prosper.
And I think Daniel knew from the Word of God exactly what was going on.
And he knew his purpose.
And the reason he was happy to go with the education that they wanted to give him and the
the names they wanted, that was fine.
But he has resolved to live a godly lifestyle and wouldn't eat unclean meat.
And they said yes to that.
And Daniel was really blessed through that.
The result of Daniel's resolve was that Daniel and his companions excelled in all they were taught
over the next three years, and God gave Daniel something new and else possessed.
In verse 17, it says that he had understanding in all visions and dreams.
You see, God is working through this man Daniel to get him to a place where he's done so many things that there's a whole book in the Bible about him.
God is working from the moment he left Jerusalem tough times.
challenges.
But he was listening to God and God was going to do something wonderful through him.
Why were they blessed in this way?
Well, it's because they lived for God's glory and the good of his people.
And to have a godly leadership influence in the Babylonian nation for many years, read the next five chapters and you'll find
the whole story of Daniel, that's really exciting stuff.
None of us here have experienced what Daniel went through.
We have people who are in exile now, but not because they were taken from England and captured and brought here, but because they've had to flee their countries.
None of us have experienced what Daniel went through, but you will have experienced many smaller crises in your life.
How have you responded?
You know, your answer says much about your faith in God and your character.
Daniel faced the same challenge every believer of every age faces to obey God's commands and not to be conformed to this world.
That's in Romans chapter 12.
Let me read a couple of verses.
I want to read them from the message version.
And just verse two.
So here's what I want you to do.
God helping you take your everyday ordinary life, your sleeping, eating, going to work and walking around life and place it before God as an offering.
Embracing what God does for you is the best thing you can do for him.
Don't become so well adjusted to your culture that you fit into it without even thinking.
Instead, fix your attention on God.
You'll be changed from the inside out.
Readily recognize what he wants from you and quickly respond to it.
Unlike the culture around you always dragging you down to its level of immaturity, God brings the best out of you, develops well-formed maturity in you.
Who is shaping you?
Jesus or culture.
I read a story and it's a true story, I forget where I found it, but it was about a fresher spare.
And this young Christian went to the fresher spare and he made for the rugby stand.
They were keen to sign him up, but there was more than just signing up.
There was an initiation ceremony for freshers, which involved a gargantuan consumption of alcohol.
Not a helpful ingredient in developing elite athletic performance.
But John had made his own resolve before God, that alcohol would not be part of his fitness regime.
But he didn't want Jesus to be seen as a judgmental killjoy.
He wanted to be part of the team.
It was only one evening, he thought, but this was the price he was prepared to pay, or was there another way?
That's what we have to think.
Do we go the way of the world, or do we go God's way?
And he prayed for wisdom from God, and God is interested in rugby too.
Did you know that?
Not an Irish rugby at the moment, but never mind.
God is interested in rugby too.
John decided to offer to drink a pint of milk
for every sort of vodka or glass of wine that the restaurant.
Now, the human body finds large quantities of lactose, not only very unpleasant, but it has a similar effect on the contents of one's stomach as large quantities of alcohol.
Did you know that?
I didn't know that.
That was deemed sufficiently sacrificial and physically unpleasant to meet the Earth initiation criteria.
Amazing.
The result was, like Daniel, John drew the line in a gracious way so that he became one of the team's most exuberant socialites, effervescently sober, confidently Christian, non-judgmentally finding ways to help others drink less and offering a way forward for other Christians and other sports teams.
Are you so well adjusted to your culture that you fit into it without even thinking?
Are you so well adjusted that you fit into without thinking?
Or are you so well adjusted to Jesus that you know exactly where you stand and where you choose?
What about broken resolutions?
Maybe that's why if you're there and not here.
If you're like me, New Year's resolutions are usually quickly forgotten, easy to make resolutions, easy to fail.
And we all fail in our lives with Jesus and break our promises.
Peter, the apostle, expressed a resolve to the Lord when he said in Matthew 26, even if I have to die with you, I will not deny you.
Yet he did deny Jesus three times.
He broke his resolve.
But that's not the end of the story because our God is a gracious God.
And Peter's failure was not the end of his discipleship.
The resurrected Jesus would lovingly reinstate at Peter by the Sea of Galilee, asking him three times if he loved him, matching the three denials.
commissioning Peter to feed my sheep and transforming him into the bull leader that he was.
What a wonderful person Jesus is, isn't he?
Isn't he just?
Isn't he just wonderful?
You know, he's always there and he knows exactly where you're at and he wants to keep moving you on.
And if sin gets in the way he wants to deal with it and free you from it,
Maybe you need to ask why your Christian resolutions have failed.
And that's just getting into a place where you seek his forgiveness.
What was wrong?
What went wrong?
Why?
Listen to Jesus, ask for a new resolution.
And then remember that we are exiles.
If you're a Christian, you're living as a foreigner,
as an exile.
Exile is the place where you are not yet fully at home.
And where God is not fully in charge.
Did you know that?
God's not fully in charge.
The whole world's in the hands of Satan or something it says, doesn't it?
But God is there.
Exiles is a place where we are not yet fully at home and where God is not fully in charge.
Not yet.
The day will come.
One day every knee will bow and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God.
Peter writes in 1 Peter 2, Dear friends, I urge you as foreigners and exiles to abstain from sinful desires which wage war against your soul.
lives such good lives among the pagans that though the accuser of doing wrong they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us.
We are called to be both resident and alien, at home but not at home.
We live in a culture that has increasingly shifted away from Christian values.
You just have to flick through the TV channels and try and find a program that you feel comfortable with.
So many are not of Christian values.
We who are Christian values are often viewed as being out of touch, dismissed as intolerant, judgmental and dangerous.
We are in exile.
We're in exile.
Our wonderful Lord Jesus Christ made the ultimate example of resolve.
He said, when the days, it says in Luke chapter 9, I think, when the days drew near for him to be taken up, he set his face to go to Jerusalem.
I love that.
He set his face to go to Jerusalem, to die on a cross, to forgive all your sins.
past, present and future, online.
There's no greater love in the universe than that, is there?
There's no greater love.
Who else will free you from past failure and sin but Jesus?
Who else can take you by the hand and take you into the next step of God's plan for your life?
Can you be like Jesus and set your face to do God's will?
to live for him.
Now is a good time to make a new start with new resolves.
Can you commit to live good lives among pagans and do good deeds and glorify God?
I want to bring yes, just so you see how I prepare my sermons.
There's this part that's just one page of my sermon preparations, right?
But I was looking for a tour and most of them up and put them in the bin when I finished my preparation.
But there's one thing that really struck me and it's about, well, it's about choosing the easy way.
When I go on an aeroplane and you can see the ground below you, you see rivers.
And what would the rivers look like?
Well, nine times out of ten, they're winding like this, right?
And the reason that is, is because the river looks for the place of least resistance.
They will flow around anything that blocks the way.
And we've got to be aware of that.
We've got to be a people that's going to be flowing this way and that way because there's a barrier in the way.
But rather,
We want to go God's way, submission to God and to those under authority that God has placed.
That was Daniel's decision.
Victory often starts when we resolve.
Don't yield to temptation.
Be an overcomer.
That's so good.
The rest of us are rubbish.
Can you commit to live good lives among pagans and do good deeds and glorify God?
We could take a moment of reflection now.
I remember there to be a Daniel, there to stand alone, there to have a purpose firm there to make it known.
There's something good about that verse.
I think we'll take a moment of reflection, ask for resolve.
Maybe resolve to be like Daniel.
What do you see in Daniel that you want in your life today?
Or there to stand alone, maybe to stand alone to be God's person among, maybe you're already there, God's person amongst a lot of non-Christians in your workplace, in your street,
Maybe to reveal a clear purpose for your life, to ask God to give you a clear purpose.
And maybe to make your faith in Jesus known, I belong to Jesus.
And my lifestyle says I belong to Jesus.
And the greatest love of my life is Jesus.
And let your neighbors know it, let your colleagues know it, let your friends know it.
Let's just take a moment to quiet now just to reflect on that.